                         Message Customization Overview

   $Id$

   Copyright (c) 2001 by ircd-hybrid team

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   Hybrid now supports gettext (provided in GNU gettext/libintl) to enable
   easier customization of messages, allow message files to be changed at
   runtime, and to provide pre-made translations.

   This document is split into two parts, using message files, and creating
   your own.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

                    Using Provided or Pre-made Message Files

   There are a number of message files provided with Hybrid 7. These can be
   found in the source tree in messages/ and messages/translations/.

   The ircd will install custom.po and ayb.po upon a make install on systems
   that configure finds a working gettext on. These will be installed into
   the prefix directory under messages/. To install the provided
   translations, you must change to the messages/translations directory in
   the source tree. In this directory, you can run make install, and ircd
   will install all of the translated .po's into messages/ in the prefix.
   There is no way at the present time to install a single .po file.

   These message files can be used in ircd once they are installed. Try the
   installed message file with /quote SET MSGLOCALE <locale> first. Locale
   will be 'standard' for the plain messages that are Hybrid's default. 'ayb'
   and 'custom' are available on any installation that configure finds a
   working gettext for. If the translations were installed, they can be set
   by 'ircd-<language>', such as 'ircd-danish' or 'ircd-norwegian'.

   If the desired message file works without any issues, it can be set to be
   the default message file in the ircd.conf file. Refer to example.conf's
   documentation on the message_locale setting.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Creating Your Own Messages

   This process is a little more complicated. The easiest way to start
   editing messages is to take a file such as custom.po, make a copy, and
   change whatever msgstr lines you wish.

     Important: Please do NOT ever change msgid lines, as this will prevent
     your customization from being used by gettext.

   Once you have your customized message file ready, place it into messages/
   in the source tree, and open Makefile.in in a text editor. Insert a line
   in the middle of the SRCS line, for example right after or right before
   custom.po. Place the name of your customized message file on this line,
   followed by a \.

   Example:

 SRCS = \
   custom.po \
   new.po \
   ayb.po

   Since these directories are under configure's control, any Makefile
   changes must be done to Makefile.in. This also requires configure to be
   rerun with at minimum the prefix option.

   You will now be able to cd into messages/ and run make install.

   There is always a chance of creating a syntax error, but the benefit to
   using gettext over Hybrid 6's src/messages_cust.tab is that syntax errors
   will not break the compile of the server, just of the message file.

   Creating a message file from scratch is relatively simple as well. cd into
   messages/ and run ./create_po <name>.po. This command will generate a
   blank message file, listing all of the ircd default message ID's, with no
   replacements. Any message that you wish to keep the same as the ircd
   defaults, you will leave the msgstr set to "". Any message that you wish
   to change requires you to write a complete replacement for in msgstr.
   Again, please do NOT change the msgid. The replacement string must contain
   the same number of % arguments, and the arguments must be kept in the same
   order.

   Once your message file is complete, you must put it into Makefile.in as
   described above. You must then rerun configure as described above. If the
   default (standard locale) messages ever change in Hybrid, your file can be
   updated with the make mrupdate command in the messages/ directory. Be sure
   and have a backup of your old one first, as this sometimes will give
   unusual entries in the .po files. Before attempting to use the updated
   message file, you must read through the customized file and be sure that
   it is correct.

   If you create a translation for a new language, or an update to an
   existing translation, please do not hesitate in sending the .po file to
   the Hybrid team. Providing a translation will be a way that nearly anyone
   who knows multiple languages to contribute to ircd, and get their name in
   the translation credits.
